If you want to run some AI models
locally, Olama is one of the fastest
ways you can get started. In this video,
I'll show you how to use Warp to set up
Olama in the easiest way. You'll profile
your device to see what you can run, see
the difference between models, and run
it on your device and integrate Olama
into your application. Running LLMs
locally is heavy on any system. So,
before we start with Olama, let's see
what we're working with. To run LLMs
locally, you need some beefy specs. On
Mac, you have the unified memory. I have
64 gigs on this machine. On Windows, I
have an Nvidia RTX 590 which has 32 GB
of VRAM. The difference here is that Mac
can hold larger models with weaker
performance while the Nvidia cards can
have extreme performance, but at the
cost of not fitting it all into VRAM.
Once you have an understanding of your
specs, let's install Olama. Ola is one
of the easiest ways we can run AI models
locally. It's free and can run entirely
on your command line. Once we download,
let's open up Warp and see if it
installed correctly. If you're familiar
with other registrybased command line
tools like Docker or MPM, then this will
feel very familiar. We can easily run an
AI model by doing Olama run model. But
what AI model should we use refer to
your system specs to see what is doable
for you. But if you look on Olama's
website, you'll be able to see the
parameters that the model size is. Let's
give two models a try. First, let's give
the Open AI GPT OSS 20 billion parameter
model a try. This model is very good and
capable. It needs at least 16 GB of VRAM
and additional for the context. But
what's so cool about this model is its
ability for tool calls. To show this
feature, Olama has a built-in web search
feature in the desktop app. Do know that
this does require an Olama login to
prevent abuse unless turbo mode is
enabled. The model itself is still
running locally.
Now let's give another model a try. Quen
3 8 billion parameters.
This is way faster. However, you can see
that the quality of output just isn't
quite the same. This is where it becomes
super important to test what works for
you and what doesn't. Some large
language models don't have to be that
smart. They just have to be fast and
sort of accurate. Other large language
models have more defining features, like
some are better at code while others are
better at creative writing. There are
benchmarks online, but of course, be
skeptical. The real way to determine
what's best for you is just to try them.
Large language models come in all
different types of flavors. Here are
some different terms simplified so that
we're choosing a local model, it's a lot
easier to pick. Thinking is when the
model thinks to itself in large blocks
of text before giving you an answer.
This is usually best when you're trying
to figure out some complex problem and
need a little bit more time to think.
Tools are things you can give a large
language model to use when it's figuring
out an answer. For example, I could give
it a web search tool and rather than
just guess what my query is, it can
decide to use that tool instead. Vision
has the ability to look at images and
include it within its responses.
Embedding is outside the large language
models specifically. It turns your text
into a mathematical format that can make
applications using natural language
search much easier. The number B part
represents the amount of billions of
parameters. The higher the number, the
more intelligent the model is, but also
requires much more processing power.
It's safe to say that the amount of VRAM
should be equal to the amount of
parameters in billions. For example, 1
billion parameters is 1 GB of VRAM, give
or take. The quantization is a form of
reducing the memory of a large language
model while sacrificing quality. By
default, Olama will download all your
models using 4-bit quantization, which
is a good middle ground between
optimization and not having too much
performance hit. In general, just use
the large language model that gives you
the features that you want and nothing
more. Now, it's one thing to run this on
the command line, but you realistically
want to integrate this into something
different. Good news. It's actually
really simple and most likely doesn't
really need any refactoring. Most large
language models use the OpenAI
compatible endpoints. Most likely your
application does as well. So I'm going
to ask Warpier to go to my code file and
search for where I initialized the
OpenAI client. Then I'm just going to
switch out the base URL with this is the
default. And insert as the API key. Then
where you get your chat completion
endpoint, just insert the model that you
want to use. The great part about Olama
is that it will automatically spin up
the large language model once it's
initialized and background it when it's
inactive. If your app is local first and
this is a great way to save on
resources. Of course though you can
bypass this completely by integrating
some sort of polling feature or just
completely disabling the time to live
altogether. Now, every single chat
application you use has customizable
features that you can play with like the
temperature, system prompt, top P, and
this is also possible in O Lama. First,
let's pull the model that we want to
edit to make sure it's on our computer.
We can then save this as a new model so
we can use it at another time. Here's a
great tip. Use Warp to build a model
file for you so that you get a much more
detailed prompt and system message for
what you need. So, for example, I'm
going to ask Warp to create a model file
for a YouTube title generator. And then
it's going to be a much more detailed
system prompt that you can use.
And there you go. Olama running large
language models locally.